First, let us talk about the DICOM standard.
DICOM standard is a standard which has been around since the '80s.
Dicom stands for Digital Imaging and Communication in Medicine.
The standard defines two things;
it defines the file format,
which is basically how you store the data,
and it defines a set of what's called DIMSE or DICOM web services that
define the networking operations and define
how the data can be moved around clinical networks.
It's a free and open standard,
it is published online.
Anyone can go online and reference the standard and read what fields
are in all those DICOM files mean and how this DICOM files are structured.
It is used by all scanners to
produce images and to send these images over to clinical network.
If you are working with 3D medical imaging data sets,
most likely you will be seeing DICOM files.
In this lesson, we will look at some of the most important details of
the DICOM standard and how metadata is stored in DICOM files.
DICOM standard is published by
the National Association of Electrical Equipment and Medical Imaging Manufacturers.
It is available on the website and free to download for anyone.
Let's take a quick look at the website.
This is the DICOM website,
you can go here in the standard tab and you can look up the current edition,
you can look up the prior editions.
As you can see, if we go, for example,
into the file storage here,
you can see that they maintain all the versions of the standard after 2014 currently,
and you can go into the most recent one and you
can even download everything as a zip file.
As you can see, the standard is pretty large,
even zipped its about 150 megabytes.
But keep in mind, you don't have to know it all, nobody knows it all,
and unless you are developing medical imaging equipment
or medical imaging viewing software,
you will not need to know all the details of the standards.
However, there are some important bits of the standards which are very
relevant analyzing medical imaging data sets
and preparing them for machine learning workflows,
and we will touch on those bits further on.
When analyzing DICOM data sets,
it is important to understand how the concepts within the DICOM data set are related.
So the top-level objects of a DICOM data set is the patient,
which is the person being imaged.
The next level under the person you have the concept of a study.
Study is one imaging session with the scanner.
Remember how we talked about different sequences that MRI scanner can make.
So the time that the patient spends with
the scanner while all these sequences are made is called a study.
One of those sequences will be called series,
so series is a collection of images that represent
one sweep through a patient and acquiring all those different slices.
As you can imagine,
the next level down under series,
you have what's called in DICOM language instances.
One instance in 3D medical imaging data sets typically represents one image,
and the series is a collection of those instances.
Within instances, you have two types of data;
you have the pixel data,
which are the actual pixels that have been acquired and reconstructed from the scanner,
and you have what's called in DICOM language data elements,
which has the metadata,
which is associated with the acquisition.
The metadata contains such things as patient name,
acquisition unique identifier, data, and many other things.
We will look into this later.